                          T R I S K E L I O N

Requirements: IBM-compatible with EGA -- EGA must have 128K at least.

This game is similar to the "Hungarian Rings" puzzle.  You rotate the
rings to move the marbles.  Of course, the challenge comes of the fact
that rings CROSS, so rotating one affects all three.

It's convenient to put the NumLock key ON -- then the 123 keys turn the
rings clockwise, and the 456 keys above them turn counterclockwise.

GOAL:  At the start, there is a central yellow triskelion and three
arcs of other colors.  Your goal is to put another color in the
triskelion.  Of course, the remaining marbles should still form
three arcs.

SUGGESTIONS for solving:  Notice that a move like 1245 doesn't change
very much.  It rotates two triads of marbles at the intersections of
rings 1 and 2.  Repeat it twice more and you're back where you started.
This kind of move is called a COMMUTATOR in group theory, and puzzles
that can be described by group theory are usually solved with the help
of commutators.  To get more specific, suppose F is a series of moves.
Define F' to be another series of moves such that the first move of F'
is the reverse of the last move of F, the second of F' the reverse of
the second-to-last of F, and so on 'til the last move of F' is the
reverse of the first move of F.  Then F followed by F' will not change
the position of the marbles.

A Commutator is of the form FGF'G', where F and G are series of moves.
Back to the example, F is 1, F' is 4, G is 2, G' is 5.  The commutator
is 1245.

Another useful commutator is 11111111222222224444444455555555.  (That's
8 repetitions of each).  This move swaps two pairs of marbles -- look
closely to see which two.  Moves of this sort will be handy!

SOLUTION: Sorry, I don't have one!  I though up the puzzle, but MY
challenge was programming it.  Enjoy!

      Neil J. Rubenking
